# Uncovering chromatin accessibility and cancer diagnostic potential via cell-free DNA utilization
### Jie Li, Xun Lan
### Schematic overview and multi-omics cohorts.
### Gene expression patterns of tumor cells can be inferred from features of circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA), such as histone modifications and fragmentation patterns at promoters. However, the direct relationship between cfDNA patterns and tumor-specific chromatin accessibility has not yet been experimentally established, limiting its current application to cancer diagnosis alone. To address this gap, we conducted a comprehensive survey of plasma cfDNA from 546 individuals, including patients with 21 different disease types and healthy donors. Our findings revealed that cfDNA coverage at transcription start sites (TSS) accurately distinguished patients with stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD, AUC 0.96), breast cancer (BRCA, AUC 0.98), and pancreatic ductal cancer (PDAC, AUC 0.88) from healthy donors, as well as patients with gastritis, noncancer illness, and other cancer types. To validate the cancer-specific cfDNA inferred chromatin features, we performed additional analyses using TCGA bulk ATAC-seq, STAD and PDAC single-cell ATAC-seq (scATAC-seq), and single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) datasets. By deconvoluting cfDNA signals, we observed the presence of tumor cells and a decrease in the proportion of dendritic cells (DCs) in the blood of PDAC patients compared to that of healthy donors. Additionally, the cfDNA-deconvoluted cell types and fractions showed strong correlation with the cell fractions annotated by the published Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell (PBMC) scATAC-seq and scRNA-seq datasets (Pearson correlation range: 0.85-0.97). In summary, our study highlights the potential of utilizing cfDNA-inferred chromatin accessibility not only to accurately identify patients with cancer but also to identify disease-specific and pathology-associated transcriptional programs from blood samples.
#### li-j19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
#### xlan@tsinghua.edu.cn
